This article is about the poet and playwright. For other persons of 
the same name, see William Shakespeare (disambiguation). For other uses 
of "Shakespeare", see Shakespeare (disambiguation).
William Shakespeare (bapt. 26 April 1564 – 23 April 1616)[a] was an 
English poet, playwright, and actor, widely regarded as the greatest 
writer in the English language and the world's greatest dramatist.
 He is often called England's national poet and the 
"Bard of Avon" (or simply "the Bard"). His extant works, including 
collaborations, consist of some 39 plays,[c] 154 sonnets, two long 
narrative poems, and a few other verses, some of uncertain authorship.
His plays have been translated into every major living language and 
are performed more often than those of any other playwright.[7]
Shakespeare was born and raised in Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwickshire.
At the age of 18, he married Anne Hathaway, with whom he had three 
children: Susanna and twins Hamnet and Judith. Sometime between 1585 
and 1592, he began a successful career in London as an actor, writer,
and part-owner of a playing company called the Lord Chamberlain's Men, 
later known as the King's Men. At age 49 (around 1613), he appears 
to have retired to Stratford, where he died three years later. Few 
records of Shakespeare's private life survive; this has stimulated 
considerable speculation about such matters as his physical appearance,
his sexuality, his religious beliefs, and whether the works attributed 
to him were written by others.[8][9][10]
Shakespeare produced most of his known works between 1589 and 1613.
His early plays were primarily comedies and histories and 
are regarded as some of the best work produced in these genres. Until
about 1608, he wrote mainly tragedies, among them Hamlet, Othello, King 
Lear, and Macbeth, all considered to be among the finest works in the 
English language.[2][3][4] In the last phase of his life, he wrote 
tragicomedies (also known as romances) and collaborated with other 
playwrights. Many of Shakespeare's plays were published in editions 
of varying quality and accuracy in his lifetime. However, in 1623, 
two fellow actors and friends of Shakespeare's, John Heminges and 
Henry Condell, published a more definitive text known as the First 
Folio, a posthumous collected edition of Shakespeare's dramatic 
works that included all but two of his plays.[13] The volume was 
prefaced with a poem by Ben Jonson, in which Jonson presciently hails
Shakespeare in a now-famous quote as "not of an age, but for all time"
Throughout the 20th and 21st centuries, Shakespeare's works have been 
continually adapted and rediscovered by new movements in scholarship 
and performance. His plays remain popular and are studied, performed, 
and reinterpreted through various cultural and political contexts 
around the world. 
William Shakespeare was the son of John Shakespeare, an alderman and 
a successful glover (glove-maker) originally from Snitterfield, and
Mary Arden, the daughter of an affluent landowning farmer. He was born 
in Stratford-upon-Avon and baptised there on 26 April 1564. His actual 
date of birth remains unknown, but is traditionally observed on 23 April, 
Saint George's Day.[15] This date, which can be traced to a mistake made 
by an 18th-century scholar, has proved appealing to biographers because
Shakespeare died on the same date in 1616.[16][17] He was the third of 
eight children, and the eldest surviving son. 
Although no attendance records for the period survive, most biographers 
agree that Shakespeare was probably educated at the King's New School 
in Stratford,[19][20][21] a free school chartered in 1553,[22] about a 
quarter-mile (400 m) from his home. Grammar schools varied in quality 
during the Elizabethan era, but grammar school curricula were largely 
similar: the basic Latin text was standardised by royal decree, and the 
school would have provided an intensive education in grammar based upon 
Latin classical authors
At the age of 18, Shakespeare married 26-year-old Anne Hathaway. The cons
istory court of the Diocese of Worcester issued a marriage licence on 27 
November 1582. The next day, two of Hathaway's neighbours posted bonds 
guaranteeing that no lawful claims impeded the marriage.[26] The ceremony
may have been arranged in some haste since the Worcester chancellor allowed 
the marriage banns to be read once instead of the usual three times, and six 
months after the marriage Anne gave birth to a daughter, Susanna, baptised
26 May 1583.[29] Twins, son Hamnet and daughter Judith, followed almost 
two years later and were baptised 2 February 1585.[30] Hamnet died of
unknown causes at the age of 11 and was buried 11 August 1596.
After the birth of the twins, Shakespeare left few historical traces until
he is mentioned as part of the London theatre scene in 1592. The exception 
is the appearance of his name in the "complaints bill" of a law case before 
the Queen's Bench court at Westminster dated Michaelmas Term 1588 and 9 
October 1589. Scholars refer to the years between 1585 and 1592 as 
Shakespeare's "lost years".[33] Biographers attempting to account for
 this period have reported many apocryphal stories. Nicholas Rowe, 
Shakespeare's first biographer, recounted a Stratford legend that 
Shakespeare fled the town for London to escape prosecution for deer 
poaching in the estate of local squire Thomas Lucy. Shakespeare is also 
supposed to have taken his revenge on Lucy by writing a scurrilous ballad 
about him. Another 18th-century story has Shakespeare starting his theatrical
career minding the horses of theatre patrons in London.[36] John Aubrey 
reported that Shakespeare had been a country schoolmaster.Some 20th-century
scholars have suggested that Shakespeare may have been employed as a 
schoolmaster by Alexander Hoghton of Lancashire, a Catholic landowner who
named a certain "William Shakeshafte" in his will.[38][39] Little evidence
substantiates such stories other than hearsay collected after his death, and
Shakeshafte was a common name in the Lancashire area.
It is not known definitively when Shakespeare began writing, but contemporary
allusions and records of performances show that several of his plays were on
the London stage by 1592. By then, he was sufficiently known in London to
be attacked in print by the playwright Robert Greene in his Groats-Worth of Wit:
there is an upstart Crow, beautified with our feathers, that with his 
Tiger's heart wrapped in a Player's hide, supposes he is as well able to 
bombast out a blank verse as the best of you: and being an absolute 
Johannes factotum, is in his own conceit the only Shake-scene in a country.
Scholars differ on the exact meaning of Greene's words, but most
agree that Greene was accusing Shakespeare of reaching above his rank in t
rying to match such university-educated writers as Christopher Marlowe, 
Thomas Nashe, and Greene himself (the so-called "University Wits").
The italicised phrase parodying the line "Oh, tiger's heart wrapped in a
woman's hide" from Shakespeare's Henry VI, Part 3, along with the pun 
"Shake-scene", clearly identify Shakespeare as Greene's target. As used 
here, Johannes Factotum ("Jack of all trades") refers to a second-rate 
tinkerer with the work of others, rather than the more common "universal genius".
Greene's attack is the earliest surviving mention of Shakespeare's work in 
the theatre. Biographers suggest that his career may have begun any time 
from the mid-1580s to just before Greene's remarks.[47][48][49] After 1594,
Shakespeare's plays were performed only by the Lord Chamberlain's Men, a 
company owned by a group of players, including Shakespeare, that soon 
became the leading playing company in London.[50] After the death of
Queen Elizabeth in 1603, the company was awarded a royal patent by the 
new King James I, and changed its name to the King's Men.[
In 1599, a partnership of members of the company built their own theatre 
on the south bank of the River Thames, which they named the Globe. 
In 1608, the partnership also took over the Blackfriars indoor theatre. 
Extant records of Shakespeare's property purchases and investments indicate 
that his association with the company made him a wealthy man, and in 
1597, he bought the second-largest house in Stratford, New Place, and in 
1605, invested in a share of the parish tithes in Stratford.
Some of Shakespeare's plays were published in quarto editions, beginning in
1594, and by 1598, his name had become a selling point and began to appear 
on the title pages. Shakespeare continued to act in his own and other plays
after his success as a playwright. The 1616 edition of Ben Jonson's Works
names him on the cast lists for Every Man in His Humour (1598) and Sejanus 
His Fall (1603). The absence of his name from the 1605 cast list for Jonson's
Volpone is taken by some scholars as a sign that his acting career was nearing
its end.[47] The First Folio of 1623, however, lists Shakespeare as one of 
"the Principal Actors in all these Plays", some of which were first staged 
after Volpone, although we cannot know for certain which roles he played.
In 1610, John Davies of Hereford wrote that "good Will" played "kingly" roles. 
In 1709, Rowe passed down a tradition that Shakespeare played the ghost of 
Hamlet's father. Later traditions maintain that he also played Adam in As 
You Like It, and the Chorus in Henry V,[61][62] though scholars doubt the 
sources of that information.
Throughout his career, Shakespeare divided his time between London and 
Stratford. In 1596, the year before he bought New Place as his family home
in Stratford, Shakespeare was living in the parish of St. Helen's, 
Bishopsgate, north of the River Thames.[64][65] He moved across the river 
to Southwark by 1599, the same year his company constructed the Globe 
Theatre there.[64][66] By 1604, he had moved north of the river again, 
to an area north of St Paul's Cathedral with many fine houses. There, 
he rented rooms from a French Huguenot named Christopher Mountjoy, a 
maker of ladies' wigs and other headgear.
Rowe was the first biographer to record the tradition, repeated by Johnson,
that Shakespeare retired to Stratford "some years before his death".
He was still working as an actor in London in 1608; in an answer to the
sharers' petition in 1635, Cuthbert Burbage stated that after purchasing 
the lease of the Blackfriars Theatre in 1608 from Henry Evans, the King's
Men "placed men players" there, "which were Heminges, Condell, Shakespeare, 
etc.". However, it is perhaps relevant that the bubonic plague raged in 
London throughout 1609.[72][73] The London public playhouses were repeatedly
closed during extended outbreaks of the plague (a total of over 60 months 
closure between May 1603 and February 1610),[74] which meant there was often 
no acting work. Retirement from all work was uncommon at that time.[75] 
Shakespeare continued to visit London during the years 1611–1614.[69] 
In 1612, he was called as a witness in Bellott v. Mountjoy, a court case 
concerning the marriage settlement of Mountjoy's daughter, Mary.[76][77] 
In March 1613, he bought a gatehouse in the former Blackfriars priory;[78] 
and from November 1614, he was in London for several weeks with his son-in-law, 
John Hall.[79] After 1610, Shakespeare wrote fewer plays, and none are attributed to 
him after 1613.[80] His last three plays were collaborations, probably with John
 Fletcher,[81] who succeeded him as the house playwright of the King's Men.[82]
Shakespeare died on 23 April 1616, at the age of 52.[f] He died within a 
month of signing his will, a document which he begins by describing himself 
as being in "perfect health". No extant contemporary source explains how or 
why he died. Half a century later, John Ward, the vicar of Stratford, wrote
in his notebook: "Shakespeare, Drayton, and Ben Jonson had a merry meeting 
and, it seems, drank too hard, for Shakespeare died of a fever there contracted",
 not an impossible scenario since Shakespeare knew Jonson and Drayton. Of the 
tributes from fellow authors, one refers to his relatively sudden death: 
"We wondered, Shakespeare, that thou went'st so soon / From the world's
 stage to the grave's tiring room.
He was survived by his wife and two daughters. Susanna had married a 
physician, John Hall, in 1607,[86] and Judith had married Thomas Quiney, a 
vintner, two months before Shakespeare's death.[87] Shakespeare signed his 
last will and testament on 25 March 1616; the following day, his new 
son-in-law, Thomas Quiney was found guilty of fathering an illegitimate 
son by Margaret Wheeler, who had died during childbirth. Thomas was ordered
 by the church court to do public penance, which would have caused much 
shame and embarrassment for the Shakespeare family.
Shakespeare bequeathed the bulk of his large estate to his elder daughter
Susanna[88] under stipulations that she pass it down intact to "the first 
son of her body".The Quineys had three children, all of whom died 
without marrying. The Halls had one child, Elizabeth, who married
twice but died without children in 1670, ending Shakespeare's direct line.
Shakespeare's will scarcely mentions his wife, Anne, who was probably 
entitled to one-third of his estate automatically.[h] He did make a point,
however, of leaving her "my second best bed", a bequest that has led to 
much speculation. Some scholars see the bequest as an insult 
to Anne, whereas others believe that the second-best bed would have been 
the matrimonial bed and therefore rich in significance.
Shakespeare was buried in the chancel of the Holy Trinity Church two days 
after his death. The epitaph carved into the stone slab covering 
his grave includes a curse against moving his bones, which was carefully 
avoided during restoration of the church in 2008:
Good frend for Iesvs sake forbeare,
To digg the dvst encloased heare.
Bleste be yͤ man yͭ spares thes stones,
And cvrst be he yͭ moves my bones.
(Modern spelling: Good friend, for Jesus' 
sake forbear, / To dig the dust enclosed 
here. / Blessed be the man that spares these stones, / And cursed be he that moves my bones.)
Some time before 1623, a funerary monument was erected in his memory on 
the north wall, with a half-effigy of him in the act of writing. Its plaque 
compares him to Nestor, Socrates, and Virgil.[103] In 1623, in conjunction
with the publication of the First Folio, the Droeshout engraving was 
published. Shakespeare has been commemorated in many statues and memorials 
around the world, including funeral monuments in Southwark Cathedral and 
Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey
Most playwrights of the period typically collaborated with others at some 
point, and critics agree that Shakespeare did the same, mostly early 
and late in his career.
The first recorded works of Shakespeare are Richard III and the three parts
of Henry VI, written in the early 1590s during a vogue for historical drama.
Shakespeare's plays are difficult to date precisely, however,[108][109] and 
studies of the texts suggest that Titus Andronicus, The Comedy of Errors, The 
Taming of the Shrew, and The Two Gentlemen of Verona may also belong to 
Shakespeare's earliest period.[110][108] His first histories, which draw
heavily on the 1587 edition of Raphael Holinshed's Chronicles of England, 
Scotland, and Ireland,[111] dramatise the destructive results of weak or 
corrupt rule and have been interpreted as a justification for the origins 
of the Tudor dynasty.[112] The early plays were influenced by the works of 
other Elizabethan dramatists, especially Thomas Kyd and Christopher Marlowe, 
by the traditions of medieval drama, and by the plays of Seneca. The Comedy 
of Errors was also based on classical models, but no source for The Taming 
of the Shrew has been found, though it is related to a separate play of the
same name and may have derived from a folk story. Like The Two 
Gentlemen of Verona, in which two friends appear to approve of rape, the 
Shrew's story of the taming of a woman's independent spirit by a man 
sometimes troubles modern critics, directors, and audiences.
Shakespeare's early classical and Italianate comedies, containing tight 
double plots and precise comic sequences, give way in the mid-1590s to the 
romantic atmosphere of his most acclaimed comedies. A Midsummer 
Night's Dream is a witty mixture of romance, fairy magic, and comic 
lowlife scenes. Shakespeare's next comedy, the equally romantic 
Merchant of Venice, contains a portrayal of the vengeful Jewish moneylender 
Shylock, which reflects Elizabethan views but may appear derogatory to 
modern audiences. The wit and wordplay of Much Ado About Nothing,
the charming rural setting of As You Like It, and the lively merrymaking of 
Twelfth Night complete Shakespeare's sequence of great comedies.[127] After 
the lyrical Richard II, written almost entirely in verse, Shakespeare introduced
prose comedy into the histories of the late 1590s, Henry IV, parts 1 and 2, 
and Henry V. His characters become more complex and tender as he switches 
deftly between comic and serious scenes, prose and poetry, and achieves the 
narrative variety of his mature work.[128][129][130] This period begins and 
ends with two tragedies: Romeo and Juliet, the famous romantic tragedy of 
sexually charged adolescence, love, and death;[131][132] and Julius Caesar—based 
on Sir Thomas North's 1579 translation of Plutarch's Parallel Lives—which 
introduced a new kind of drama.[133][134] According to Shakespearean scholar 
James Shapiro, in Julius Caesar, "the various strands of politics, character, 
inwardness, contemporary events, even Shakespeare's own reflections on the 
act of writing, began to infuse each other.
In the early 17th century, Shakespeare wrote the so-called "problem plays"
Measure for Measure, Troilus and Cressida, and All's Well That Ends Well 
and a number of his best known tragedies. Many critics believe that 
Shakespeare's greatest tragedies represent the peak of his art. 
The titular hero of one of Shakespeare's greatest tragedies, Hamlet, 
has probably been discussed more than any other Shakespearean character, 
especially for his famous soliloquy which begins "To be or not to be; 
that is the question". Unlike the introverted Hamlet, whose fatal 
flaw is hesitation, the heroes of the tragedies that followed, Othello 
and King Lear, are undone by hasty errors of judgement.[139] The plots 
of Shakespeare's tragedies often hinge on such fatal errors or flaws, 
which overturn order and destroy the hero and those he loves.[140] In 
Othello, the villain Iago stokes Othello's sexual jealousy to the point 
where he murders the innocent wife who loves him. In King Lear,
the old king commits the tragic error of giving up his powers, initiating
the events which lead to the torture and blinding of the Earl of 
Gloucester and the murder of Lear's youngest daughter Cordelia. 
According to the critic Frank Kermode, "the play-offers neither its
good characters nor its audience any relief from its cruelty". In Macbeth,
the shortest and most compressed of Shakespeare's tragedies, uncontrollable
ambition incites Macbeth and his wife, Lady Macbeth, to murder the rightful 
king and usurp the throne until their own guilt destroys them in turn.
In this play, Shakespeare adds a supernatural element to the tragic 
structure. His last major tragedies, Antony and Cleopatra and Coriolanus,
contain some of Shakespeare's finest poetry and were considered his 
most successful tragedies by the poet and critic T.S. Eliot.
In his final period, Shakespeare turned to romance or tragicomedy and 
completed three more major plays: Cymbeline, The Winter's Tale, and The 
Tempest, as well as the collaboration, Pericles, Prince of Tyre. Less bleak 
than the tragedies, these four plays are graver in tone than the comedies 
of the 1590s, but they end with reconciliation and the forgiveness of 
potentially tragic errors.[151] Some commentators have seen this change 
in mood as evidence of a more serene view of life on Shakespeare's part, 
but it may merely reflect the theatrical fashion of the day.
 Shakespeare collaborated on two further surviving plays, Henry VIII and 
 The Two Noble Kinsmen, probably with John Fletcher